www.abyssinialaw.com Contents page No. The Revised Family Code Proclamation I CHAPTER ONE Conclusi on 0f Marriage ;' 3 Section I General 3 Section 2 Essential Conditions of Marriage 4 Section 3 Opposition to Marriage 7 Section 4 Marriage Celebrated Before an officer of civil status (Civil Marriage) 8 Section 5 Other Marriages 10 Section 6 Registration of Marriage 10 CHAPTER TWO Effects of Violations of Essential Conditions of Marriage II CHAPTER THREE Effects of Marriage 14 Section I General Rules 14 Section 2 Personal Effects of Marriage 16 Section 3 Pecuniary Effects of Marriage 17 CHAPTER FOUR Dissolution of Marriage 23 Section I Divorce hy Mutual Consent 24 Section:2 Divorce hy Petition 25 CHAPTER FIVE Liquidation of Pecuniary Relations Between Spouses 27 www.abyssinialaw.com CHAPTER SIX 30 Proofof Marriage ......, ..,.. CHAPTER SEVEN 31 Irregular Union CHAPTER EIGHT Settlement of Disputes Arising out of Marriage and 35 IrregularU nion 35 Section I General Provisions 37 Section 2 Power of the Court 38 Section3 Arbitration " CHAPTER NINE 40 Filiation Section I Ascertai nment of Paternity and Maternity 40 Sub-Section I General Provisions 40 Sub-Section 2 Presumption of Paternity 40 Sub-Section 3 Acknowledgement of Paternity 42 Sub-Section 4 Ascertainment of Paternity by 44 Judicial Declaration Section 2 Legal conflicts in Regulating Paternity 45 47 Section 3 Proof of Filiation Section 4 Contestation of Filiation and Disowning 50 Sub-Section I Contestation of Filiation 50 51 Sub-Section 2 Disowning CHAPTER TEN 54 Adoption. , .,.. CHAPTER ELEVEN 60 Obligation to Supply Maintenance www.abyssinialaw.com CHAPTER TWELVE Minors ..".. .., 64 Section I General Provisions 64 Section 2 Organs of Protection of Minors 65 Section 3 Powers of the Guardian and of the Tutor 74 Sub-Section J Care of the Person of the Minor 74 Sub-Section 2 AdmimstratlOn of Property or the Minor " ,7'8. Section 4 Sanction of the Rules for the Protection of the Minor ..,....,..,., ..., 85 Sub-Section I Acts of inor ,.E5 Sub-Section 2 Acts of theTutor 86 , Sub-Section 3 Liabilities which May be Incurred 87 Section 5 Cessation of the Disability of the Minor 88 Sub-Section I Emanicipation 88 " Sub-Section 2 Rendering Accounts of Tutorship 89 CHAPTER THIRTEEN Miscellaneous Provisions ...,. , 90 " www.abyssinialaw.com Federal Negarit Gazetta of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 6'hyear Addis Ababa Extra Ordinary Issue No, I 4thDayof July,2000 The Revised Family Code Federal Negarit Gazetta Extra Oridnary Issue No. 1/2000 The Revised Family Code Proclamation No. 213/2000 www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code PROCLAMATION No.213/2000 THE REVISED FAMILY CODE PROCLAMATION OF 2000 Preamble WHERijAS, the family, being the natural bas.is of society, shall be protected by the society and the state, and that one of the means ofprotection is effected by regulating and governing family relation by law; WHEREAS, it has become essential to make the existinll Ethiopian family law in accordance with the socio-economic development of the society and, above all, with the Constitution of the country, and, inparticular, realizing that marriage shall bebased on the free consent of the spouses, and that itisnecessary toprovide the legal basis which guarantees the equality of the spouses during the conclusion, duration and dissolution of marriage; WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the existing law in such away that itgives priority to the well-being, upbringing and protection of children in accordance with the Constitution and International Instruments which Ethiopia has ratified; WHEREAS, it is found necessary to settle disputes arising in famIly by a competent organ in ajust and efficient manner; WHEREAS, in order to realize these objectives, it has become essentIal that a family law be enacted by the House of Peoples' Representatives to be applicable in administrations that are directly accountable to the Federal Government; NOW, THEREFORE, inaccordance with Article 55 (1)ofthe Constitution of the.Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows: 1. Short Title This proclamation may be cited asthe' 'Revised Family Code Prodamation No. 21312000." www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 2 2. Effective Date The Revised Family Code of 2000, as published in a separate volume appearing as Extraordinary Issue No. I of 2000 of the 4thday Federal Negarit Gazeta, shall come into force as of the of July, 2000. 41hday of July, 2000. Done at Addis Ababa, this NEGASO GIDADA (DR.) PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 3 CHAPTER ONE CONCLUSION OF MARRIAGE Section J. General Article I. - VaJious Fonns of Marriage. I) Marriage may beconcluded before anofficer ofcivil status. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article, marriage may be concluded in accordance with the religion or custom of the future spouses. Article 2. - MaJTiage Concluded before an Officer of Civil Status. Marriage shall be deemed to be concluded before anofficer of civil status when a man and a woman have appeared before an officer of civil status for the purpose of concluding marriage and the officer of civil status has accepted their respective consent. Article 3. '- Religious Marriage. Religious marriage shall take place when aman and awoman have performed such acts or rites as deemed to constitute a valid marriage by their religion or the religion of one ofthem. Article 4. - Maniage According to Custom. Marriage according to custom shall take place when a man and a woman have performed such rites as deemed to constitute a valid marriage by the custom of the community in which they live or by the custom of the community to which they belong or to which one of them belongs. www.abyssinialaw.com 4 Revised Family Code Article 5. - Marriage Celebrated Abroad. Marriage celebrated abroad in accordance with the law of the place of celebration shall be valid in Ethiopia so long as it does not contravene public moral. Section 2. Essential Cqnditions of Marriage Article 6.- Consent. A valid marriage shall take place only when the spouses have given their free and full consent. Article 7.- Age. I) Neither a man nor a woman who has not attained the full age of eighteen years shall conclude marriage. 2) Notwithstanding the provisionsof Sub-Article (I) of this Article, the Minister of Justice may, on the application of the future spouses, or the parents or guardian of one of them, for serious cause, grant dispensation of not more thantwo years. Article 8.- Consanguinity. I) Marriage between persons related by consanguinity inthe direct line, hetween ascendants and descendants, is prohibited. 2) In the collateral line, a man cannot conclude marriage with his sister or aunt; similarly, a woman cannot con- clude marriage with her brother or uncle. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 5 Article 9. - Affinity. I) Marriage between persons related by affinity in the direct line is prohibited. 2) In the collateral line, marriage between a man and the sister of his wife, and a woman and the brother of her husband is prohibited. Article 10. - Filiation not Established Legally. The existence ot a bond of natural filiation which is commonly known to the community ISsufficient to render applicable the impediments to marriage referred to in Ankles 8 and 9, notwithstanding that the filiation is not legally established. Article J1.- Bigamy. A person shall not conclude marriage as long as he is bound by bonds of a preceding marriage. A.rticle 12. - Representation not Allowed. I) Each of the future spouses shall personally be present and consent to the marriage at the time and place of its celebration. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Art. (1) of this Article, marriage by representation may be allowed by the Ministry of Justice where it has ascertained that there is a serious cause and the person who intended to do so has fully consented thereto. ArtIcle 13. - Fundamental Error. I) Marriage concluded as a result of error in consent shall not be valid. 2) Consent is deemed to be vitiated as aresult of error where such error is a fundamental error. , 3) Without prejudice to the provisions of Sub-Article (2) of www.abyssinialaw.com 6 Revised Family Code this Article, the following shall be considered to be fundamental errors: (a) error on the identity of the spouse, where it is not the person with whom a person intended to conclude marriage; (b) error on the state of health. of the spouse who is affected by a disease that does not heal or that can, be genetically transmitted to descendants; (c) error on the bodily conformation of the spouse who does not have the requisite sexual organs for the consum- mation of the marriage; (d) error on the behaviour ofthe spouse who has the habit of performing sexual acts with person of the same sex. Article 14. - Consent Extorted by Violence. I) Marriage concluded as a result of consent which is extor ted by violence shall not be valid. 2) Consent is deemed to be extorted by violence where it is given by a spouse to protect himself or one of his ascendants or descendants, or any other close relative from a serious and imminent danger or threat of danger. Article 15. - Judicially Interdicted Persons. I) Any person who is judicially interdicted shall not conclude marriage unless authorized, for that purpose, by the court. 2) An application to this effect may be made by the interdicted person himself or by his guardian. Article J6. - Period of widowhood. I) A woman may not remarry unless one hundred and eighty www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 7 days have elapsed since the dissolution of the previous marnage. 2) The provisions of Sub-Article (I) of this Article shall not apply where: (a) the woman gives birth to achild after the dissolution of her marriage; (b) the woman remarries her former husband; (c) it is proved by medical evidence that the woman is n;otpregnant; (d) the court dispenses the woman from observing the period of widowhood. Section 3. Opposition toMarriage Article 17. - Opposition. Opposition may be made when marriage isto be concluded in violation of one of the essential conditions of marriage. Article 18. - Opposition by whom Made. Opposition to the conclusion of marriage shall be made only by the following persons: (a) In case of age, by the parents of the minor, public prosecutor or any other mterested person; . - (b) In case of relationship by consanguinity or affinity, by the ascendants of the future spouses, or the ascendants of one of them, or by the brothers or sisters of the future spouses, who have attained the age of eighteen years or by the public prosecutor; (c) Incase of bigamy, by the person alleging to have had a pripr marital relationship with the bigamous spouse or by the public prosecutor; www.abyssinialaw.com 8 Revised Family Code (u) Incase ofjudicial interdiction, by his guardian, orby the public prosecutor. Article 19.- Form und Time of Opposition I) Opposition to marriage shall be made in writing and submitted to the officer of civil status within fifteen days from the notification of the marriage. 2) The officer of civil status shall receive the opinion ofthe future spouses before deciding on the opposition. Article 20. - Decision on the Opposition. I) The officer ot civil status shall decide on the opposition within five days. 2) The decision of the officer tocelebrate the marriage shall be final. 3) Where the opposition is sustained, the officer of civil status shall refuse to celebrate the marriage. 4) In such case. the officer of civil status shall give reasons of his refusal and inform same forthwith to the future spollses. Article 21. - Appeal. I) The future spouses or one of them may petition to the court against refusal under Sub-Article (3) of Article 20. 2) Where the court overrules the decision of the officer of civil status, such officer shall celebrate the marriage. Section 4. MalTiuge Celebrated before an Officer of CiviI status (civil m<llTiage) Article 22. - Authorized Officer of Civil Status. Civil marriage shall be concluded before the officer of civil status of the place where one of the future spouses or one of www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 9 the ascendants or close relatives of one of them has established residence by continuously living. there. for not less than six months prior to the date of the marriage. Article 23. - Request for Celebration of Marriage. The future spouses shall inform,the officer of civil status of their intention to conclude marriage not less than one month prior to its celebration. Article 24. - Fixing the Date of Marriage. Upon receipt of the request, the officer of civil status shall, in consultation with the future spouses, decide the exact date of the conclusion of marriage and publicize same by any appropriate means. Article 25 - Formalities of Celebration. I) Marriage shall be concluded publicly in the presence of the future spouses and two witnesses for each of the future spouses. 2) The future spouses and the witnesses shall declare, under oath, that the essential conditions of marriage are not violated. 3) The officer of civil status shall inform the future spouses and their witnesses, before taking oath, of the consequen- ces of their declaration. 4) Each of the future spouses shall declare openly to the officer of civil status that they consented to conclude marriage on their own free will. 5) Each of the spouses and their witnesses shall sign in the www.abyssinialaw.com 10 Revised Family Code register of civil status. 6) Upon fulfillment of the formalities prescribed above, the officer of civil status shall pronounce them united in marriage and shall issue a certificate of marriage to that effect. Section 5. Other Marriages Article 26. - Religious Mamage I) The conclusion of religious marriage and the formalities thereof shall be as prescribed by the religion concerned. 2) The provisions of this Code relating to the essential conditions of marriage shall be complied with inreligious mamage. Article 27. - Customary Mamage. I) The conclusion of customary marriage and the for- malities thereof shall be as prescribed by the custom of the community concerned. 2) The provisions of this Code relating to the essential conditions of marriage shall be complied with in cus- tomary marriage. Section 6. Registration of Marriage Article 28. - Registration. I) Marriage shall be registered by a competent officer of civil status irrespective of the form according to which the arriage is celebrated. www.abyssinialaw.com Rcvised Family Code II 2) The officer of civil status who recorded the marriage in accordance with Suh-Article (I) of this Article shall issue a certificate of marriage to the spouses. 3) Any marriage shall have effect from the date of its conclusion. Article 29. - Record of Mi.lrriage. I) Where the spouses have failed to have registered their marriage in accordance with Sub-Article (I) of Article 28, te offief civiIstatus shall draw up the record of marnage of hIs own motion whenever he becomes aware of the marriage. 2) In such cases, the officer of civil status shall summon the spouses and their witnesses to sign in the record of marnage. Article 30. - Particllla/:';of the Record ofMwTiage. The record of marriage shall show: (a)'the full nams, dates, and places of birth, of each of the spouses and their addresses; (b) the full names, dates and places of birth, of the witnesses, and their addresses; (c) the form of the marriage, the date on which it has been concluded and the date of its registration. CHAPTER TWO EFFECTS OF VIOLATIONS OF ESSENTIAL CONDITIONS OF MARRIAGE Article 31.- Age. I) Without prejudice to Sub-Article (2) of Article 7 of this Code, marriage concluded by aman or awoman under the www.abyssinialaw.com 12 Revised Family Code age of eighteen years shall dissolve on the application of any interested person or the public prosecutor. 2) Itmay no longer be applied for after the ag required by law for marriage is satisfied. Article 32. - Consanguinity orAffinity. The dissolution of marriage concluded in violation of im- pediments arising out of consanguinity or affinity shall be ordered on the application of any interested person or the public prosecutor. Article 33. - Bigamy I) The dissolution of a bigamous marriage shall be ordered on the application of either of the spouses of the bigamous marriage or the public prosecutor. 2) The dissolution mentioned inSub-Article I(1)of this Article may no longer be applied for where the former spouse of the bigamous marriage has died. Article 34. - Dissolution of Marriage of aJudicially Interdicted person. I) Where a judicially interdicted person has contracted marriage without prior authorization of the court, the dissolution of such marriage may be requested from the court by thejudicially interdicted person himself or by his guardian. 2) The judicially interdicted person may no longer make an www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 13 application for dissolution six months after the date of termination of his disability. 3) An application for dissolution by the guardian may no longer be made six months after the day on which the guardian came to know the ,existence of the marriage or. in any case, after the disability of the interdicted person has ceased. Article 35. - Act of Violence. I) Whosoever has concluded marriage under the influence of violence may apply to the court to order the dis- solution thereof. 2) Such an application may not bemade six months after the cessation of such violence and, in any case, two years after the conclusion of the marriage. Article 36. - ElTar, I) Whosoever has concluded marriage due to fundamental error, may apply to the court to order the dissolution thereof. 2) Such an application may not be made sixmonths after the discovery of such error, and, in any case, two years after the conclusion of the marriage. Article 37. - Period of Widowhood. The dissolution of marriage may not be ordered for the sole reason that the period of widowhood specified under Sub- Article (I)of Article 16has not been observed. www.abyssinialaw.com 14 Revised Family Code Article 38. -incompetence of Officer of Civil Status. The dissolution of marriage may not be ordered solely on the ground of incompetence of the officer of civil status who celebrated the marriage. Article 39. - Non-Observance of Formalities. The dissolution of marriage may not be ordered on the sole ground that the formalities of celebration specified under Sub Articles (3) and (6) of Article 25 have not been observed. CHAPTER THREE EFFECTS OF MARRTAGE Section 1. General Rules Article 40. - Various }-<ormsof Marriage Equivalent. I) Marriage produces the same legal effects whatever the form according to which it has been celebrated. 2) No distinction shall be made as to whether the marriage has been concluded before an officer of civil status or according to the forms prescribed by religion or custom. Article 4J. - Consummation of Marriage. The effects of marriage shall not depend on the real or presumed consummation of the marriage. Article 42. - (J) Contract of Marriage. I) The spouses may, before or on the date of their marriage, regulate by a contract the pecuniary effects of their marnage. 2) They may also specify in such contract their rec!procal rights and obligations in matters concerning their per- sonal relations. 3) Such contracts shall not affect mandatory provisions of the law. Article 43. - (2)Incapacity of Spouses. . I) The contract of marriage of ajudicially interdicted person www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 15 shall be of no effect unless it is entered into by the interdicted person himself and approved by the court. 2) A legally interdicted person shall not be subject to incapacity as regards the making of a contract of marnage. Article 44. - (3) Form of Contract. A contract of marriage shall be of no effect unless made in writing and attested byfour witnesses, two for the husband and two for the wife. Article 45( - (4) Deposit of Contract. 1) A copy of the contract of marriage shall be deposited in the court or with the office of civil status. 2) It maybe treely consulted by anyone of the spouses or by p_ersonsauthorized by court or by anyone of the spouses. Article 46. - (5) Restrictions toFreedom of Contract. I) The spouses shall not impose an obligation upon third parties by their contract of marriage. 2) The contract of marriage shall be of no effect where it simply refers to local custom, religion or law of acountry. Article 47. - (6) Modifications to Contract of Marriage I) Where the interest of the family so requires, the spouses may, by agreement, modify the terms of the contract of marriage and request the court for approval of such modifications. 2) The court rriay approve such modifications where it ascertains that it does not affect the interest ofthe family. 3) Where the modifications are approved by the court under Sub-Article (2) of this Article, a copy of the modified contract shall be deposited in the court or with the office of civil status. www.abyssinialaw.com 16 Revised Family Code . Article 48. - (7) Legal Regime. Inthe ab/o;enceof contract of marriage or where the contract of marriage is not valid under the law, the following provisions shall apply. Section 2. Personal Effects of Marriage Article 49. - Respect. Support and Assistance. I, N The spouses owe each other respect, support and assis- tance. 2) The contract of marriage shall not derogate such rule. Article 50. Joint Management ofFwnily. (I) General Rule. - I) The spouses shall have equal rights inthe management of the family. 2) The spouses shalLin all cases, co-operate, to protect the security and interest of the family to bring up and ensure the good behaviour and education of their children inorder to make them responsible citizens. (2) Inahility of One of the Spouses. Article 51. - I) Where one of the spouses is under disability, absent, ahandons his family or is away or, for any other reason, is not in aposition to give his consent, the other spouse shall alone carry out the duties mentioned in Article 50. 2) The spouses shall not agree to the contrary in the contract of marriage. Article 52. - Children ofprevious Marriage. I) Each of the spouses shall retain an exclusive right of decision in matters concerning the up bringing of children whom he had hefore the marriage. 2) Any agreement to the contrary shallbe ofnoeffect. Article 53. - Cohabitation. I) The spousesarehound to live together. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 17 2) They shall have with one another the sexual relations normal in marriage unless these relations involve a risk of seriously prejudicing their health. 3) Any agreement to the contrary shall be of no effect. Article 54 - Determination o/Residence. The spouses shall jointly decide their common residence. Article 55. - Separation by Agreement. 1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 53 (1) of this Code, the spouses may agree to live separately for a definite or indefinite period of time. 2) Any agreement made to this effect may be revoked at any time by one of the spouses provided that such revocation is not arbitrary. Article 56. - Duty of Fidelity. The husband and the wife owe fidelity to each other. Section 3.Pecuniary Effects of Marriage Article 57. - Personal Property of Spouses (1) Property not acquired by Onerous Title. The property which the spouses possess on the day of their marriage, or which they acquire after their marriage by succession or donation, shall remain their personal property. Article 58. - (2) Property Acquired by Onerous Title. 1) Property acquired, by onerous title, by one ofthe spouses after marriage shall also be personal property of such spouse where such acquisition has been made by ex- change for property owned personally, or with monies owned personally or derived from the sale of property owned personally. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 18 2) The provisions of Sub-Article (l) of this Article shall apply only when the court, at the request of one of the spouses, has decided that the property thus acquired shall be owned personally by s\lch spouse. of Personal Property (1) Principle. Administration Article 59. - 1) Each spouse shall administer his respective personal property and receive the income thereof. 2) Each spouse may freely dispose of his personal property. (2) Determination by Contract of Marriage. Article 60. - I) It may be agreed inthe contract of marriage that one ofthe spouses shall administer all or part of the personal property of the other spouse and that he may dispose of such property. 2) The spouse who is entrusted with the power of adminis- tering the property under Sub-Article (1) of this Article shall, at the request of the other spouse, submit an annual statement of accounts of the management of such property. Article 61. - (3)Agency. One of the spouses may freely entrust to the other spouse the administration of all or part of his personal property. Article 62. - Common Property DfSpouses. I) All income derived by personal efforts ofthe spouses and from their common orpersonal property shall be common property. 2) All property acquired by the spouses during marriage by an onerous title shall be common property unless declared www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 19 personal under Article 58 (2) of this Code. 3) Unless otherwise stipulated in the act of donation or will, Property donated or bequeathed conjointly to the spouses shall be common property. Article 63. - Legal Presumption. I) All property shall be deemed to be common property even ifregistered inthe name of one ofthe spouses unless such spouse proves that he is the sole owner thereof. 2) The fact that certain property ispersonal may not be setup by the spouses against third parties unless the latter knew or should have known such fact. Article 64. - Income ofSpouse( 1)Normal Management. I) Each spouse shall receive his earnings. 2) The spouses may deposit their respective earnings either in personal orjoint bank account. 3) One of the spouses shall, atthe request of the other spouse, render an account to the latter of the income received by him. Article 65. - (2) Exception. I) One of the spouses may freely give the other spouse a mandate to receive the income which is due to him. 2) The court may. at the request of one of the spouses, authorize such spouse to receive the income of the other spouse and to give receiptthereof. www.abyssinialaw.com 20 Revised Family Code .3) Unless other laws provide otherwise, the court may also order the full or partial attachment of the income of either spouse. Article 66. - Administnltion of Common Property. I) Common property shall be administered conjointly by the spouses unless there isan agreement which empowers one of them to administer all or part of the common property. 2) Where one of the spouses is declared incapable, or is deprived of his right of property management or for any other reason is unable to administer the common property, the other spouse shall alone administer such common property. Article 67. - Duty to give Notice. The spouse who performs an act of management in respect of common property is duty bound to inform the other spouse thereof. Article 68 - (1) Requisite of Agreement of Spouses Unless provided otherwise by other laws, the agreement of both spouses shall be required to; (a) sale, exchange, rent out, pledge or mortgage oralienate in any other way a common immovable property to confer a right to third parties on such property; www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 21 (b) sale, exchange, pledge or mortgage, or alienate in any other way, a common movable property or securities registered in the name of both spouses: the value of which exceeds five hundred Ethiopian birr. (c) transfer by donation of a common property the value of which exceeds one hundered Ethiopian birr, or money which exceeds such amount; (d) borrow or lend money exceeding five hundred Ethiopian birr or to stand surety for a debt of such amount to another person. Article 69. - (2) Absence of Agreement. I) Where one of the spouses has entered into obligations in violation of the provisions of the preceding Article, the court may, at the request of the other spouse, revoke, such obligations. 2) An application for cancellation may not be made six months after the day on which the other spouse came to know the existence of such obhgation, or, in any case, two years after such obligation is entered. Article 70. - Debts of Spouses. I) Debts due by one spouse may be recovered on the personal property of the indebted spouse, and in the absence of such personal property, itmay be recovered on the common property. www.abyssinialaw.com 22 Revised Family Code 2) Where the debt isincurred inthe interest ofthe household. it shaJl be deemed to be joint and several debt of both spollses and may be recovered on the common property ami on the personal property of either of the spouses. Article 7/. - Debts in the Interest ofHouseho/d. The following debts shall bedeemed tobedebts incurred inthe interest of the household: (a) debts incurred to fulfiJl the livelihood of the spouses and their children; (b) debts incurred in order to fulfiJl an obligation of maintenance to which both the spouses or one of. them is bound; ! (c) other debts which are acknowledged to be such by the court at the request of either of the spouses or the creditor. Article 72. - Contribution to Household Expenses. The spouses shaJl contribute to the household expenses in proportion to their respective means. Article 73. - Contracts Between Spouses. Contracts entered into between spouses during marriage shall be of no effect unless approved by the court. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 23 CHAPTER FOUR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE Article 74. - Various Forms of Marriage Equivalent. I) The causes and effects of dissolution of marriage shall be the same whichever the form of celebration of the marnage. 2) No distinction shall be made concerning dissolution whichever the form according to which the marriage is celebrated. Article 75.- Causes ofDissolution ofMarriage. The following shall becauses ofdissolution ofmarriage: (a)death of one of the spouses, ordeclaration ofabsence, "by'thecourt, ot"one of the spouses; (b) dissolution orderbycourtduetoviolatiQnofoneofthe essential conditions of marriage; or (c) divorce. Article 76. - Conditions ofDecisjon for Divorce. Marriage shall dissolve by divorce where: (a) the spouses have greed to divorce by mutual consent and such agreement is ccepted by the court; or (b) the spouses or one of them made apetition, for divorce, to the court. www.abyssinialaw.com 24 Revised Family Code Section 1.Divorce by Mutual Consent Article 77. -Petition for Divorce by Mutual Consent. I) Where the spouses have agreed to divorce by mutual consent, such agreement, which shall also regulate the consequences thereof, shall be submitted in writing to the court for approval. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (I) of this Article, spouses whose marriage lasted for less than six months shall not be permitted to divorce by mutual consent. 3) Spouses who petition for divorce by mutual consent are not obliged to state the reason thereof. Article 78. - Power of the Court. I) Where a petition for divorce is made under Article 77 (I), the court may discuss with the spouses separately or jointly and counsel them to renounce their intention to divorce. 2) In the event that the spouses did not show willingness to renounce their intention to divorce, the court may, having regard to circumstances, dismiss them giving a cooling period of not more than three months. Article 79. - Re-application. I) Where the spouses did not change their intention to divorce within the cooling period given to them under Article 78 (2), they may re-apply to the court to approve their agreement to divorce within six months from the last date of such cooling period. 2) Notwithstanding the six months time limit provided in www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 25 Suh-A . rticle (I) of this Article, nothing shall prevent the spouses from suhmitting a new petition for divorce. Article 80. - Approval of Divorce by Mutual Consent. I) Thc court shall approve the divorce agreement only when it believes that the agreement isthe true expression of the intcntion and free consent of the spouses and is not contrary to law and morality. 2) The court shall also approve the conditions of the divorce agreed between the spouses together with the divorce agreement. 3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (2) of this Article, where the agreement of the spouses on the conditions of divorce does not sufficiently protect the interest and well being of their children, or, where it adversely affects the interests of one of the spouses, the court may approve only the divorce agreement and give decisions it may deem appropriate to correct the defects on the conditions of divorce. Section 2. Divorce by Petition Article 81. - (I) Petition for Divorce. I) A petition for divorce may be made to the court either by the two spouses conjointly or by one of them. 2) The spouses or one of them may state in the petition the reasons for divorce. Article 82. - (2) Power of the Court. I) Where the petition for divorce ismadl..under thepreceding Article, the court shall speak to the spouses separately or jointly with a view of persuading them to renounce the petition for divorce and solve their dispute amicably. www.abyssinialaw.com 26 Revised Family Code 2) Where the attempt made under Sub-Article( 1)has failed or is likely to fail, the court may direct the spouses to settle their dispute through arbitrators of their own choice. 3) Where the spouses did not agree to settle their dispute through arbitration, the court may dismiss the parties by giving them a cooling period of up to three months. 4) Where all the efforts made under the preceding provisions have failed, the court shall pronounce divorce within one , . month from the receipt of the reports of arbitrators, or the end of the cooling period, as the case may be. 5) From the time the petition for divorce is brought before it, the court shall forthwith give appropriate order regarding the maintenance of the spouses, the custody and main- tenance of their children and the management of their property. 6) Where circumstances absolutely require that one of the spouses leave their common abode, the court shall, when giving an order under Sub-Article (5)ofthis Article, take into consideration the interest of children and the con- dition of the spouse who may be affected more by leaving their common abode. Article 83. - Decision on Conditions of Divorce. I) Where the marriage is dissolved by divorce under this section, the court shall request the spouses to agree on the conditions of divorce. 2) Where the spouses are not willing to agree or have failed to agree in accordance with Sub-Article (1)ofthis Article, the court shall, by itself, or through arbitrators, or experts aiJPointed by it, or by any other means it thinks appropriate, deCide on the conditions of divorce. 3) The conditions of divorce agreed upon by the spouses www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 27 or decided by arbitrators or experts shall be submitted to the court for approval. 4) After deciding the divorce, the court may postpone the judgment on conditions of the divorce for not more than six months. Article 84. - Indemnities. Where the cause of the divorce is imputable to one of the spouses and where justice so requires, the court may order such spouse to make good the damage sustained bythe other spouse. CHAPTER FIVE LIQUIDAnON OF PECUNIARY RELAnONS BETWEEN SPOUSES Article 85. - Liquidation by Agreement. I) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Coderelating to compensation, where the marriage is dissolved in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the pecuniary relation between spouses shall be liquidated in accordance with the agreement entered into by the spouses or the contract of their marriage. 2) In default of a contract of marriage or an agreement, or if these are not valid under the law, the pecuniary relations between spouses shall be liquidated inaccordance with the following provisions. Article 86. - Retaking oFPersonal Property. I) Each spouse has the right to retake his personal property in kind where he shows that he is the sole owner thereof. 2) If one of the spouses proves that any of his personal property has been alienated and that the price thereof has www.abyssinialaw.com 28 Revised Family Code fallen in the common property, he has the right to withdraw therefrom, beforehand, money or things of value corresponding to such price. 3) Where both spouses have such right-each of them shall take their respective share from the common property in proportion to their contribution. Article 87.- Indemnities. I) Where one of the spouses who has been vested with the power to administer the common property or the per- sonal property of the other spouse inaccordance with this law, has performed acts which adversely affect such spouse. or where the spouse who has performed such acts did not have the mandate, or where such acts constitute acts of bad administration, or have been performed in fraud of tne right of the spouse making the claim, the court may, at the request of the aggrieved spouse, award damage to such spouse. 2) No claim for indemnity based on Sub-Article (I) of this Article may be made by reftson of acts which have been performed five years before the dissolution of the marnage. Article 88. - Un/awtil/ Enrichment. Unless otherwise agreed. the court may award indemnity to a spouse who proves that the personal property of the other spouse or of the common property has been enriched to the prejudice of his own personal property. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 29 Article 89. - Protection of Creditors. Where there is a debt incurred by either spouse or both spouses conjointly, and such debt is confirmed by judicial decision, or acknowledged by the spouses, such debt shall be paid before partition of property. Article 90. - (I) Partition of Common Property. Without prejudice to the provisions of the preceding Articles and agreements entered into by th spouses, common property shall be divided equally between the spouses. Article 91. - (2) Rule of Partition in Kind. I) As a rule, partition shall be made in kind in such away that each spouse receives some property from the common property. 2) Where itisnot possible to divide such Common Property equally under Sub-Article (l) of this Article, the inequality of shares inkind shall be setoff by the payment of sums of money. 3) The utmost care sall be taken to give each spouse things which are most useful to him. ArtiCle 92. - Properties which areDifficult toDivide. I) If there is a certain property which is difficult or impossible to be divided and if the spouses do not agree as to who shall have that property in his share, such www.abyssinialaw.com 30 Revised Family Code . - - property shall be sold and the proceeds thereof shall be divided between them. 2) If the spouses do not agree on the condition of sale and,if one of them so requires, the sale shall be made by auction. Article 93.  Debts ofSpouses due afterDissolution of the Marriage. I) If adebt which was to bepaid from the common property becomes due after the dissolution of the marriage and after the partition of the property, each spouse shall be liable in proportion to his share. 2) If the debt concerns one of the spouses, only such spouse shall pay it. CHAPTER SIX PROOF OF MARRIAGE Article 94. - Certificate of Marriage.. Marriage is proved by producing the certificate of marriage drawn up at the time or fter the celebration of the marriage in accordance with the law. Article 95. - Proof in Default of Certificate of Marriage. When it is difficult to prove marriage by producing the certificate of marriage due to the fact that the marriage has not been registered or such register has been lost, it shall be proved by the possession of status of spouse. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 31 .. Article 96. - Possession of Status (1) Definition. A man and a wdman are deemed to have the possession of status of spouses wheM they mutually consider themselves and live as spouses and when they are considered and treated as'such by their family and the community. Article 97. - (2) Proof of Marriage by Possession of Status. I) Where aperson alleging the existence of marriage proves the possession of status of spouse in accordance with the preceding Article, the court may presume that marriage has been concluded. 2) The presumption in Sub-Article (1)of this Article may be rebutted by producing any kind of reliable evidence. CHAPTER SEVEN IRREGULAR UNION Article 98. - (/) Definition. An irregular union is the state of fact which is created when a man and a woman live together as husband and wife without having concluded a valid marriage. Article 99. - (2)bxpJanation. I) It is necessary and sufficient in order to have an irregular union that the behaviour of the man and of the woman be analogous to that of married people. www.abyssinialaw.com 32 Revised Family Code 2) They need not represent themselves to third parties as being married. 3) The mere fact that a man and a woman keep up sexual relations between them, even if repeatedly and notoriously, is not sufficient by itself to constitute an irregular union between such man and woman. Article 100. - No Bond of Affinity Created. 1) An irregular union shall not create any bond of affinity between the man and the relatives of the woman , and between the woman and the relatives of the man. 2) The provisions concerning impediments to marriage in the case of affinity shall, however, apply in the case of an irregular union. Article 101. - Contribution to Common Expenses. The man and the woman living in an irregular union shall contribute to the common expenses in proportion to their respective means. Article 102. - Community of Property. I) Without prejudice to agreements entered into between the man and the woman engaged in an irregular union concerning the administration of their property, property acquired during such relation shall be common property provided that the relation has lasted for not less than three years. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 33 2) Unless proved to the contrary, properties they have during their cohabitation shall be considered to have been acquired within such relation. 3) The man and the woman engaged in an irregular union shall bejointly and severally liable for all debts incurred for their maintenance, or for the maintenance of their children born of such union. Article l03. - Effects of Community of Property. Where community of property is created in accordance with Sub-Article (1) of Article 1Q2, matters pertaining to the administration of property, payment of debts, and liquidation of property shall be dealt with in accordance with the ,provisions of this Code relating to Liquidation of Pecuniary Relations of Spouses (Art. 85-93). Article 104.- Filiation of Children. The filiation of children born of an irregular union shall be established inaccordance with the provisions ofthe Chapter of this law relating to Filiation. Article l05. - Termination of Union. I) A man and awoman engaged inanirregular union may, at any time, put an end to such union. 2) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 102of this Code, the party who terminates the union shall not be liable to pay damages unless he commits fault. www.abyssinialaw.com 34 Revised Family Code Article 106.- Proof of Union. I) An irregular union may be proved by the possession of such status. 2) A man and awoman may have the possession ofthe status of persons living in an irregular union when, although they are not married,-they behave as such, and when their families and the community consider them living as married couple. 3) If one of the parties iscapable of proving the existence of I the state of fact provided under Sub-Article (2) of this Article, the court shall presume that they live in an irregular union. 4) The above presumption may be rebutted by producing any kind of reliable proof. Article 107. - Other Relations out of Marriage. I) Rclations established between a man and a woman out of wedlock or out of an irregular union shall have no juridical effect attached to them. 2) Without prejudice to the provisions pf this Code relating to Acknowledgement of paternity or Adoption, children horn of such relation ships shall have ajuridical bond only witl1their mother. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 35 CHAPTER EIGHT SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES ARISING OUT OF MARRIAGE AND IRREGULAR UNION Section I. General Article 108. - Applicuble Law. Without prejudice to the procedural provisions provided in this Code, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code of. Ethiopia, shall be applicable to disputes arising on matters provided in this Code. Article 109. - Applicclbi lity ofProvisions Relating toLiquidation ofPecuniwy Relations Between Spouses. I) The provisions of Chapter Five of this Code shall be applicable accordingly notwithstanding that the marriage .isdissolved not by divorce. 2) When the dissolution of marriage iscaused bythe death of one of the spouses, the provisions of Chapter Five of this Code shall be applicable accordingly to disputes which may arise between the surviving spouse and the heirs of the deceased concerning the partition of property. Article I10.- DiputeBetween Spouses. The court may, when it deems necessary, sit in camera while consulting with the spouses either jointly or separately or when examining witnesses, as the case may be. www.abyssinialaw.com 36 Revised Family Code Article 11I.-Decision. Where circumstances require that it is necessary for the protection of the reputation ofthe spouses and their family, the court may confine itself to stating the existence of sufficient causes for the divorce without writing details ofthe case in its decision. Article 112.- Apppenl. No appeal shall lie solely on the judgement of the court deciding divorce. Article 113.- Custody of Children. I) The court shall, when deciding the dissolution of marriage, also decide as to which spouse shall have custody of the children, care of their education, health, maintenance and the rights of the parents and the children to visit each other. 2) When giving decision under Sub-Article (1), the court shall take into account the income, age, health, and condition of living of the spouses as weII as the age and interests of the children. 3) The court may, on application and taking into account the change of circumstances, revise or reverse its decision given under this Article regarding the custody and maintenance of the children. Article 114.- Irref!ulnr Union. The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to the extent they are relevant, to cases concerning irregular union. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 37 Section 2. Power of the Court Article / /5. - Existence of Valid Marriage. Only the court is competent to decide whether a marriage has been concluded and whether such marriage is valid. Article //6. -Inegu/ar Union. Only the court is competent to decide whether an irregular union has been established between a man and a woman. Article / /7.- Divorce and Its Effects. Only the court is competent to decide on divorce, decide or approve the effects of divorce inaccordance with Article 83of this Code. Article / /8. - Disputes Arising out of MalTiage. I) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 117, disputes arising out of marriage shall be decided by arbitrators chosen by the spouses. 2) Any party who is dissatisfied with the decision of arbitrators may appeal to a court having jurisdiction. 3) The court, having examined the petition, may approve, amend or reverse the decision of arbitrators. Such decision of the court shall be final. www.abyssinialaw.com 38 Revised Family Code Section 3. Arbitration Article I19. - Appointment of Arbitrators. I) Where the spouses have decided to settle thei dispute through arbitration in accordance with Article 82 (2) of this Code, they shall appoint one or more arbitrators and submit, within fifteen days from the date they were told to do so, the names of those arbitrators to the court. 2) On receiving the list of arbitrators or when the arbitrators appear before itin accordance with Sub-Article (I) of this Article, the court shall make a record forthwith and give direction as to how thereconciliation 'has toproceed and to submit the result of the arbitration or the attempt of reconciliation within three months. 3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (2) of this Article, the court may, where itdeems necessary, examine the progress of the arbitration and make orders for submission of periodical reports thereon. Article 120. - Additional Time. Without being restricted by the provisions of Article 119, where the court is of the opinion that the spouses may settle their dispute through arbitration, it may, having regard to the progress of the arbitration, give additional time of not more than one month. Article 12I. - Responsibility of Arbitrators. I) The arbitrators shall make an effort to reconcile the spouses and to make them renounce their petition for www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 39 divorce. 2) Where the arbitrators have concluded that the dispute cannot be solved except by divorce, they shall report the result of their attempt to the court without delay. 3) The arbitrators shall have no power to give any order or decision concerning the spouses except persuading them to resolve the issue through arbitration. Article 122. - Failure to Submit R_eport. I) Where the arbitrators have failed to submit reports in accordance with Articles 119 and 121 of this Code, the court shall close the case. 2) Where the spouses or one of them have ptitioned the court to reopen the case within one month from the dateof the closure of the case by stating the reasons for not submitting the report and that the issue has not been settled through arbitration, the court may reopen the case and give appropriate decision. 3) The closure of the case under Sub-Article (1) of this Article may not prohibit th spouses or one of them from submitting a new petition and request for their case be reconsidered. www.abyssinialaw.com 40 Revised Family Code CHAPTER NINE FILIATION Section J. Ascertainment of Paternity and Maternity Sub-Section 1. General Provisions Article 123. - Legal Rules MandatOly. Unless the law expressly authorizes, the legal rules concerning the ascertainment of paternity and maternity shall not be derogated by agreement. Article 124.- Maternnl Filiation. Maternal filiation is ascertained from the sole fact that the woman has given birth to the child. Article 125.- PaternalFiliation. I) Paternal filiation results from the maternal filiation when a relation provided for by the law has existed between the mother and a certain man at the time of the conception or the birth of the child. 2) Itmay result from an acknowledgement ofpaternity made by the father of the child. 3) It may also result from ajudicial declaration. Sub-Section 2. Presumption of Paternity Article /26. - Presumption of Paternity of the Husband A child conceived or born in wedlock has the husband as father. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code. 41 Anic1e 127. - Generality of Presumption. I) The provisions of Article 126 shall apply whatever the manner in which the maternal filiation of the child may have been established. 2) They shall also apply when the record of birth of the child does not indicate the husband as the father of the child or when it indicates that another man is the father of the child. 3) In such cases, the record of birth shall merely be corrected. ArtIcle 128. - Duration of Pregnancy. I) A child shall be deemed to have been conceived in wedlock if he is bom more than 180 days after the celebration of the marriage and within 300 days after its dissolution. 2) No proof to the contrary shall be admitted. Article 12Y.- Absence ot the .Husband. The provisions of this Code concernmg presumption )f paternity shall not apply to achild born 300 days after the day indicated, as the date of last news, in the judgement declaring the absence, of the person presumed by law as the lather. Amcle J30. - In-egu1ar Umull. I) Achild conceived or born during an inegular union has as father the man engaged in such union. 2) Thc provisions of Articles 127 and 128 concerning the gcnerality of presumptions and the duration of pregnancy shall apply to the presumption provided in this Article. www.abyssinialaw.com 42 Revised Family Code . Sub-Section 3. Acknowledgement of Paternity Article 131. - (J) Principle. When the father of the child is not determined by applying the provisions of the preceding Articles, the paternal filiation of the child may be established by an acknowledgement of . paternity. Article 132. - (2) Definition. An acknowledgement is deemed to be made when a certain man made adeclaration that he consides himself the father ofa certain child. merely conceived or born. Article 133. - (3) Form. An acknpwledgement of paternity results from the declaration made by a man before an officer of civil status or by aWill he made in writing or by a document attested by any competent authority that he is the father of the child. Article 134. - Representation. I) The declaration shall be made personally by the father of the child even though he is a minor. 2) The mandate to make such a dechiration shall only be given by a special power of attorney approved by the court. 3) It may be made personally by a person subject tojudicial interdiction or in his name by a legal representative, with the p.ermission of the court. Article /35. - Death of the Father. If the father of the child is dead or is not in a position of manifesting his will, the acknowledgement ofpaternity may be made, in his name, by one of his parents. Article /36. - Non-Admission by the Mother. I) The acknowledgement of paternity shall be of no effect unless it has been acknowledged, to be well founded, by the mother of the child. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 43 2) If the mother of the child is dead or is not in a position of manifesting her will, the acknowledgement ofpaternity may be accepted by the maternal grandfather or grand- mother of the child. 3) In default of maternal grandparents, itmay be accepted by another maternal ascendant or by the guardian of the judicially interdicted person. Article /37. - Majority of the Child. An acknowledgement of paternity shall be of no effect unless it has been accepted by the child himself when it is made after the latter has attained majority. Article /38. - Condition of Acceptance. The acknowledgement of paternity shall be deemed to be accepted where. the persons mentioned in Articles 136 and 137have not raised any protest against such acknowledgement within one month after they came to know of it. Article /39. - Death of the Child. The acknowledgement of paternity may not be made after the .death of the child unless the latter has left descendants. Article 140. - Revocation. 1) The acknowledgement of paternity may not be revoked. 2) A minor who has acknowledged achild J?ay revoke such acknowledgement for so long as he is incapable and within one year following the cessation of his incapacity, unless his guardian consented to the acknowledgement. 3) This right of revocation may be exercised by the minor only. It may not be exercised by his legal representatives nor by his heirs. www.abyssinialaw.com 44 Revised Family Code Article 141. - Annulment. 1) Acknowledgement of paternity may be annulled on the ground of violence. 2) It may not be annulled on the ground of error or fraud unless itisdecisively proved that the child could nothave been conceived of the person who made the acknowled- gement. Article 142. - Several Acknowledgements Prohibited. Where an acknowledgement of paternity has been made in regard to a child, no other acknowledgement of the child by another man shall be permitted unless the first acknowled- gement has been annulled. Suh-Section 4. Ascertainment of Paternity by Judicial Declaration Article 143. - (I) Judicial Declaration of Paternity. Where. after applying the preceding Articles, the father of the child is not ascertained. ajudicial declaration of paternity may be obtained under the following conditions; (a) in the case where the mother has been the victim of ahdyction or rape at the time of conception of the child; (b) in the case where, at the time of conception of the child, the mother has been the victim of seduction accompanied by abuse of authority, promise of marriage, or any other similar act of intentional deception; (c) in the case where there exist letters or other documents written by the claimed father which unequivocally prove paternity: (d) inthe case where the claimed father and the mother of the child have lived together incontinuous sexual relation, without having a legally recognized relation, in the period regarded by law as the period of pregnancy. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 45 (e) in the case where the person claimed to be the father of the child has participated in the maintenance, care and education of the child in the capacity of a father. Article 144.- (2)Action forJuQjciaJDeclaration ofPaternity. An action brought for judicial declaration of paternity, based on the provisions of the preceding Article shall be of noeffect under the following conditions: (a) In the case where the mother of the child had sexual relationship with another man in the period regarded by law as the period of pregnancy unless it is proved by medical or other reliable evidence that such man is not the father of the child; (b) In the case where the claimed person could not be the father of the chiIdfor he was absent or has been a victim of accident during the period regarded by law as the period of pregnancy. (c) In the case where the person claimed to be the father of the child decisively proves by blood examination or other reliable medical evidence that he could not be the father of the child. Alticle 145. - No other Cases. A judicial declaration of paternity shall not be demanded or made except in the cases specified under Article 143 of this Code. Section 2. Legal Conflicts in Regulating Paternity Article 146 - Regulation of Paternity (1) Pri,nciple. \\then, on <.pplying the preceding Articles, a child must be attributed to several fathers, a regulation of paternity may be made by agreement between the persons towhom the paternity of the child is thus attributed by thelaw. , www.abyssinialaw.com 46 Reyised Family Code Article 147.- (2)Form I) The agreement by which: the regulation of paternity is made shall be attested by three witnesses and approved by the court. 2) Except in the case of force majeure, the mother of the child shall be heard in person. rticle 148. - Legal Presumpt!on. Failing regulation of paternity, the following two piesump- tions shall be applied successively, where appropriate; (a) the child shall be attributed to the husband ofthe mother in preference to the man who has an irregular union with the mother; (b) the child shall be attributed to the husband or the man with whom the mother is living at the time of the birth, in preference to the husband or the man with whom she was ,living at the time of the conception. Article 149. - (1) Assignment of Paternity by Agreement. I) Where the child is born within 210 days from the conclusion of the marriage or the commenceJ11ent of the irregular union, the husband or the man who isliving with the woman may, by agreement, assign the paternity of the child to another person who declares that he is the father of the child. 2) Where the child is born more than 210 days after the dissolution of the marriage or the cessation of the irregular union, the husband or the man who lived with the mother shall have the right provided in the preceding Sub-Article. www.abyssinialaw.com evised Family Code- 47 Article 150. - (2) Form. I) The agreement on the assignment of paternity shall be attested by three witnesses and approved by the court. 2) Except in the case of force majeure, the mother of the child shall be heard in person. Article 151. - Representlltion. I) The agreements mentioned in this section shall be concluded by the interested parties themselves where they have attained the age of majority and are not judicially interdicted. 2) A mandate to conclude them may only be given by a soecial power of attorney approved by the court. Article 152. - RevoC;l[Jon. The agreement on the assignment of paternity shall not be revoked. Article 153.- Annulment. I) The agreement on the assignment of paternity may be annulled on the ground of violence. 2) It may not be annulled on the ground of error or fraud unless it isdecisively proved that the child could not have heen conceived of the person who has declared to he the father. Section 3. PmofofFiliation Article 154. - Record otBi/1h. Both the paternal and the maternal filiation of a person are proved hy his record of hirth. www.abyssinialaw.com 48 Revised Family Code Article 155. - Proof in Default of Record of Birth. In default of a certificate of birth, filiation is proved by the possession of the status of child. Article 156. - Possession of Status (I) Definition A person has the possession of the status of child when he is treated by the community as being the child of such man or woman. Article 157. - (2) Proof by Possession of Status. I) Where the possession of the status of child is proved in accordance with the preceding Article, the court shall take presumption that the child is born of such .man or woman. 2) The presumption under the preceding Sub-Article may be rebutted by proving that the child could not be born of such man or woman. Article 158. - Action to Claim Filiation. I) Indefault of possession ofthe status ofchild, filiation may be proved by witnesses or by any other evidence. 2) The action to claim filiation may not be instituted except with the permission of the court. 3) Such permission shall not be granted unless there are presumptions or indications resulting from concrete facts enabling the court to grant permission. Article /59. -lmldmissibi/ity of Action. No permission to institute the action toclaim filiation shall be www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 49 granted where the person whose filiation is to be established has already another filiation resulting from his birth certificate and corroborated by possession of a status in conformity with such certificate. Article /60. - Person to Institute the Action. . I) The action to claim filiation may be instituted by the child, by his guardian or by his heirs. 2) It may also be instituted by those who claim to be the father or the mother of the child. Article /61. - When to Institute the Action. I) The child may institute the action to claim filiation at any time during his life. 2) The parents or guardians of a child may institute it only during the minority of the child. 3) The heirs may not institute itunless the child died before the age oftwenty years and within one year after hisdeath. Artlcle /62. - Penwn Against Whom Action Instituted. I) Where the action to claim filiation is instituted by the mother, it shall be made against the child. 2) In other cases, it shall be instituted against the mother or her heirs. www.abyssinialaw.com 50 Revised Family Code Section 4. Contestation ofFiliationandDisowning Sub-section I. Contestation ofFiliation Article 163.- Principle. The maternalfiliationofthechildmaybecontestedatanytime by any interested person. Article 164.- Admissibility ofAction. I) The actiontocontest filiation maynotbeinstitutedexcept with the permission of thecourt. 2) Such permission shall not be granted unless there are presumptions or indications resulting fromconcrete facts enabling the court to grant permission. Article 165.- Inadmissibility ofAction. Where the filiation of the child results from the certificate of birth and iscorroborated byapossession ofstatus,permission to institute an action tocontest filiation may not begranted. Article 166. - Person Against Whom Action Instituted. I) The action to contest filiation shall be instituted against the person whose filiation is contested or against his heirs. 2) The mother and, where necessary, the father of the child shall bejoined as parties in the proceedings. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Fc.unilyCode 51 Sub-Section 2. Disowning Article 167. - Principle. The paternal filiation of a child may he contested only hy means of an action to disown. Article 168. - No Sex(wl IntercoLl1:<.;ewith the Mother (I ) Principle. The person to who III the law attrihutes the paternity of aohild may disown such child hy proving decisively that ho could not have had sexual intercourse with the mother during the period between the JOO'h and 180lhday hefore the hirth of the child. Article 169- (2) LegLlIPresumption. I) The spouses shall he deemed to have had no sexual intercourse with one another during the time when they actually lived separately following apetition for divorce made hy one of them or in consequence of an agreement conduded hetween them. 2) Proof to the contrary hy any means is admissible. A/1icle 170. - When PLltemity is Impossible (1) Principle. The person to whom the law attributes the paternity of achild may disown such child hy proving decisively that it is absolutely impossihle that hecould be the father of the child. www.abyssinialaw.com 52 Revised Family Code Article 171. - (2) Admissibility of Action. I) The action to disown based on the preceding Article may not be instituted except with the permission of the court. 2) Such permission shall be grarted when there are presum- ptions or serious indications resulting from sufficient and reliable facts enabling the court to accept the action. Article 172. - (3) Presumptions and serious Indications. I) The presumptions and serious indications may consist of physical characteristics of the child recognized by science to be incompatible with those of the father. 2) They may also result from the fact that the woman has concealed the birth of the child or her pregnancy to the man under circumstances which are apt to create doubts as regards his paternity. Article 173. - (4) Adultery or Admission ofthe Mother. The adultery of the mother or her admission that the child has another father are not sufficient, by themselves, to constitute serious circumstantial evidence. Article /74. - Plaintiff in theSuit. I) Only the person to whom the paternity of the child is attributed by legal presllmption may institute an action to disown. 2) No action to this effect may be made bythe mother orby a man who claims the paternity of the child or by the public prosecutor or by the child himself. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 53 Alticle J75. - Judicially Interdicted Person. I) An action to disown may, with permission of the court, be instituted by the judicially interdicted person himself. 2) The action may, with the same permission, be instituted in the name of the interdicted person by his guardian. Article J76. - Time (J)Principle. I) An action to disown shall be instituted by the man to whom the paternity of the child isattributed by law within 180 days following the day he knew or he should have known the bil1h of the child. 2) Where the maternal filiation isestablished by an action to claim a status, the action to disown shall be instituted within 180 days from the judgement deciding on the action to claim a status having become final. Article J77. -- (2) ExceptiQn. I) Where the person to whom the paternity of the child is attributed by law dies or becomes incapacitated within the time fixed by law for instituting the action to disown, one of his descendants, in his stead, may institute an action to disown. 2) In default of descendants, the right to disown may be exercised by his father, or mother, or in their default, by one of his ascendants. 3) In default of ascendants, itmay be exercised by one of his brothers or sisters, to the exclusion of any other heir or representati ve. www.abyssinialaw.com 54 Revised Family Code Artic/e /78. - Inndmissihility of Action. Disowning: shall not be allowed where it is proved that the child has been conceived by means of artificial insemination with the written consent of the husband. Article /79. - Defendnnt in the Suit. I) The action todisown shall,beinstituted against the child or, where he is dead. against his heirs. 2) The mother of the child shall bejoined in the suit. 3) Where the child is minor, he shall be represented by a tutor ad hoc appointed by the court for this purpose. CHAPTER TEN ADOPTION Article /80. - Adoptive Filintion. (I) Principle. Adoptive filiation. may he created by an agreement between a person and a child. Article /8/. - (.2)Effects. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 182,an adopted child shall. for all purposes, be deemed to be the child of the adopter. Article /82. - (3) Snving CInuses. I) Adoption shall be of no effect with regard to the ascendants or collaterals of the adopter who have expres- sly opposed the adoption. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 55 2) The opposition referred to in Sub-Art. (I) of this Article shall he of no effect unless it is registered in a court registry within one year from the approval of the agreement of adoption hy the court. Article 183. - Rehltionship of the dopted Child with the Pun?ily of Origin. I) The adopted child shall retain his bonds with the family of orlgm. 2) The same shall apply to the spouse and'the descendants of the adopted child. 3) Wherever a choice has to be made between the family of adoption and the family of origin, the family of adoption shall prevail. Article 184. - Age of Adopter. I) Any person whose age is not less than twenty-five years may adopt. 2) Where an adoption ismade by two spouses, itissufficient that one of them be of the full age of twenty-five years. Article 185. - Age of the Adopted Child. Any person who is less than eighteen years of age and \mder guardianship may he adopted. Article 186. - Adoption by Married Person. I) Where the adopter is married, an agreement of adoption may not be made unless the two spouses conjointly adopt the child. 2) The provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article shall not apply where aperson adopts the child of his or her spouse. 3) Nor shall it apply where one of the spouses is not in a position to manifest his will. www.abyssinialaw.com 56 Revised Family Code Article 187.- Adoption of ChildMerely Conceived. I) A child merely conceived may be :ldopted. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Art. (1) of this Article, the adoption agreement may be revoked unilaterally at the will of the mother within six months fo11owing the birth of the child. Article 188. - ChNdren ofc/dopter. I) The existence of children of the adopter sha11 not constitute an obstacle to adoption. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article, the court, before approving the adoption, shall take into consideration the effects of the existence uf children of the adopter on the we11being and interest of the adopted child. Article 189.- Impossibility ofAdoption by Several Persons. I) No child may be adopted by several persons unless these are two spouses. 2) However, in the case of death of the adopter) a new adoption is possible. 3) Where a child has been adopted by two spouses and one of sllch spouses dies, the child may be adopted by the new spollse of the surviVOl'. Article 190. - Parties to the Agreement. The agreement of adoption shall be made between the adopter and the guardian of the adopted child. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 57 Article 191. - Consent ofPi.lrents of the Adopted Child. I) Both thefather and the mother ofthe adopted chiIdmust give their consent to the adoption where they are alive and known. 2) Where one of them isdead, absent, unknown or incapable to manifest his will, the other parent shall give his consent. 3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article, where one of thc#parents is not willing to give his consent and the child is ten and above years of age, the court may approve the adoption upon hearing the opinion of the other parent and of the child. 4) Where the child has no ascendant capable of giving his consent,the court may approve the adoption agreement taking into account the interest ofthe child. Article /92. - Government orprivi.lte Olphi.lni.lges. I) Government or private orphanages may give any child under their custody to adopters. 2) The above mentioned orphanages shall, before giving the child for adoption, provide sufficient information to the government organ having authority tofollow upthewell being of children asto the identity of the child, how the orphanage received him, and about the personal, social andeconomic position of theadopter. Article 193. - Where the Adopter is aForeigner. I) Where the adopter is a foreigner, the court may not www.abyssinialaw.com 58 Revised Family Code approve the adoption unless an authority empowered to follow the well being of children, after collecting and analyzing relevant information about the personal, social and economic position of the adopter, gives its opinion that the agreement is beneficial to the child. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article, where the court thinks that the agreement is not beneficiarto the child, it may disregard the opinion of the" authority and reject the agreement. 3) Where the court finds that the information provided by the concerned authority is insufficient, it may order the authority to conduct further investigation and submit additional information. It may also order other in- dividuals .or organizations to provide any relevant infor- mation in their possession or to give testimony. Article J94. - Power of the Court. I) An agreement of adoption shall be of no effect unless itis approved by the court. 2) Before approving the agreement of adoption, the court shall decisively verify that the adoption is to the best interest of the child. 3) Without prejudice to the provisions, ofArticles 192, 193 (2) of this Article, the court, before ap- and Sub-Art. proving the agreement of adoption, shall take the following into consideration: (a) the opinion of the child about the adoption; (b) the opinion of the guardian or tutor of the child if he has not previously given his consent: www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 59 (c) The capability ofthe adopter to raise and take care of the child: d) where the adopter is a foreigner, the absence of access to raise the child in Ethiopia; e) the availability of information which will enable the court to know that the adopter will handle the adopted child as his own child and will not abuse him. 4) The court shall take special care In investigating he conditions provided in Sub-Art. (3) (e) of this Article, where the adopter is a foreigner. Article /95. - IJ7"evocability of Adoption. I) Adoption may not be revoked for any reason other than that provided in Sub-Art. (2) of this Article. 2) Where the adopter, instead of looking after the adopted child as his own child, handles him as a slave, or in conditions resembling slavery, or makes him engage in immoral acts for his gain, or handles him in any other manner that is detrimental to his future, the court may revoke the adoption. Article /96. - Petition for Revoking the Adoption. I). The adopted child, a government organ authorized to follow lip the well being of children, or any other interested person, may petition to the court for revoking the adoption on the basis of the preceding Article. 2) When a petition is submitted to it under Sub-Art. (I) of thisArticle. the court shall, before summoning the adopter www.abyssinialaw.com RevIsed Family Code 60 to appear before it,detenlllne whether the grounds for the petition are real and sufficient to warrant revocation. CHAPTER ELEVEN OBLIGATION TO SUPPLY MAINTENANCE Article 197-- Subject M,ltter of the Obligation. The person bound to supply maintenance under Article 198of this Code shall supply to his creditor the means to feed, lodge, clothe, and to care for his health and education, as the case may be, in adecent manner having regard to social conditions and local cllstom. Pen;om; Between Whom the Obligation Exists. Article 198. - 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 49 (1), an obligation to supply maintenance exists between ascen- dants and descendants, and between persons related by affinity in the direct line. 2) An obligation to supply maintenance likewise exists between brothers and sisters. Article 199. - Where there is no Obligation. The obligation to supply maintenance shall not subsist between relatives by affinity unless the marriage which created the affinity is dissolved by death. Article 200. - Condemnation of Creditor. The creditor shall lose his right for maintenance where he has committed or attempted to commit acriminal act on the life or property of the debtor, or of ascendants, or descendants, or of the spouse of the latter. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 6I ArtIcle 20I, - Conditions for the Existence ol the ObligatIOn. The obligation to supply maintenance shall not exist unless the person who cIaimsits fulfillment isinneed and not inastate of earning his livelihood by his work. Article 202. - Mode ofFulfilIment of Obligation. I) The obligation to supply maintenance shall, as a rule, be fulfilled by means of amaintenance allowance paid bythe debtor to the creditor for maintenance. I' 2) The amount of .such allowance shall be fixed by taking imo consideration the needs of the person claiming itand the means of the person liable thereto. Article 203. - Possibility of Revision. The decision which fixes the amount of the maintenance allowance or residence of the creditor for maintenance may be reviewed at any time upon the demand of the debtor or of the creditor. Article 204.-Place Where Allowance Paid. The maintenance allowance shall, to the extent possible, be paid at a place convenient to the creditor. Article 205. - An"eaJ:o(;I) May not be Assigned orAttached I) The arrears of a maintenance allowance may not be assigned or attached. 2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (I) of this Article, they may, even before they fall due, be assigned in favour of institutions of assistance which provide for the needs of the beneficiary of the allowance. 3) The provisions of Sub-Article (I) of this Article shall not apply regarding persons who have supplied to the www.abyssinialaw.com 62 Revised Family Code beneficiary of the allowance what was necessary for his subsistence. Article 206. - (2)No Accumulation. All arrears which have not been received or claimed within threemonthsfromtheirfallingdueshallceasetobedueunless the creditor proves that such arrears were necessary for his subsistence. Article 207 - Creditor may be taken into Debtor's House. I) The debtor for maintenance may offer to discharge his obligation by taking the creditor for maintenance into his house. 2) Where there is a disagreement under Sub-Article (I) of this Article, the court shall give appropriate decision having regard to all the circumstances. 3) The debtor for maintenance may never be compelled to take into his house the person entitled to claim main- tenance. Article 208. - Plurality ofDebtors (I) Principle. Where several persons are liable to supply maintenance to a creditor for maintenance, the latter may claim maintenance from anyone of such persons. Article 209. - (2)Recourse. I) Where there are several persons liable to pay maIn- tenance, the debtors who have paid the allowance shall have recourse against those who have not paid their shares. 2) Where a dispute arises under Sub-Article (1) of this www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 63 Article, the court may condemn the latter to repay the whole or part of the allowance, taking into account their means and their degree of relationship by consanguinity or by affinity with the person claiming maintenance. Article 2JU. - (3) Order of Debtors. The persons who are liable to supply maintenance under Article 198 of this Code shall finally bear their liability in the following order: (a) in the first place, the spouse; (b) in the second place, the descendants, according to their degree; (c) inthe third place, the ascendants, according totheir degree; (d) in the fourth place, the brothers and sisters; (e) in the fifth place, the descendants by affinity, according to their degree; (t) in the sixth place, ascendants by affinity, according to their degree. Article 2//. - Agreement Between Co-Debtors. I) The debtors for maintenance may validly agree, as regards their reciprocal relations, that maintenance shall be supplied to their common creditor by one of them. 2) If the creditor for maintenance has adhered to such agreement, he may not make a claim against the other debtors to obtain maintenance unless he has a serious reason for not respecting such agreement. Article 2/2. - Cnse of Adoption. I) The adopted child, his spouse and his descendants may www.abyssinialaw.com 64 Revised Family Code not clClimmaintenance from the family of origll1 of me adopted child unless the adoptive family is not in Cl position to supply such maintenance. 2) The adopted child shall not be bound to supply main- tenance to the ascendants ofthe family of origin unless the latter cannot claim maintenClncefrom another member of their family. Article 213. - Funeral Expenses. I) Whosoever is bound to supply maintenance to a person shall pay the funeral expenses of such person. 2) The person who has incurred such expenses may claim repayment from the debtor for maintenance. Article 214. - Particular Agreements. Any particular agreement providing for exceptions to the provisions of this Chapter shall be of no effect. CHAPTER TWELVE MINORS Section I. General Provisions Article 215. - Definition. A minor is a person of either sex who has not atwined the iillI age of eighteen years. Article 216. - Disability ofMinoni. I) A minor,asregardstheproper careofhisperson,shallbe placed under the authority of aguardian. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 65 .-1,' 2) In matters concerning his pecuniary interests and the administration of his property, a minor shall be represen- ted hy his tutor. 3) The minor shall not perform juridical acts except in the cases provided by law. Article 2/ 7.- Proof of Age I) The age of a person shall be established by his certificate of hirth. 2) In the absence of certificate of birth the age of a person shall be decided by the court based on reliable documents or by the testimony of not less than two witnesses. Article 2/8. - PJincip/e to be followed by Competent Authorities. Any decision rendered on cases based on this Chapter shaHbe appropriate to the proper care and well being of children. Section 2. Organs of Protection of Minors Article 2/9. - Authority ofPurents. The father and the mother are, during their marriage,jointly guardians and tutors of their minor children. Article 220. - Def;m/t of one of the Parents. I) In case of death, disability, unworthiness or removal of one of the parents the one who remains shall alone . exercise such functions. 2) The mother shall exercise such functions where the father of the child is unknown. www.abyssinialaw.com 66 Revised Family Code Article 221. - Divorce of Parents. I) Where the spouses decide todivorce by mutual consent in accordance with Article 77 ofthis Code, they shall decide by agreement regarding the tutor and guardians of their children. 2) Where, in any case of divorce, the spouses did not agree on the tutorial and guardianship of their children, the court which decides the divorce shall also decide the tutor and guardian of children. Article 222. - Testament<lry Guardian or Tutor (1) Principle. I) The surviving parent of a minor may, by a lastWill, stipulate who shall be guardian or tutor of the child after his death. 2) The surviving parent may also restrict the powers of the guardian or tutor, or subject the exercise of such powers to specified conditions. Article 223. - (2) Conditions for Appointment. The right referred to in Article 222 shall appertain to the father or mother of the minor only where he or she exercised during his or her lifetime the functions of guardian or tutor of the chiId,or where he or she had been relieved of such functions at his or her request. Article 224. - (3) Application to the Court. The restrictions or conditions imposed by the father or the mother on the powers of the guardian or tutor may, where the interest of the minor so requires, be revoked or modified by the court. www.abyssinialaw.com ReVIsed Family Code 67 Artjcle 225. - Relatives Called to Exercise the Functions of Guardian or Tutor (1) Order to be Followed. Where the child no longer has his father and mother, and in default of a valid appointment made by the survivor, the functions of guardian or tutor of the child shall devolve, by virtue of the law, on the following persons: (a) ascendants of the child; (b) in their default, the brothers or sisters of the child who have attained majortty: (c) in their default, the uncle or aunt of the child. Article 226. - (2) Possible Modification of such Order. I) Any relative of the child by consanguinity or by affinity may apply that the functions of guaraian or tutor of the child be accorded to him instead ofthe person who should perform such functions by virtue of A'"rticle 225. 2) Such application shall be made to the family members mentioned under Article 225, or, in the absence of agreement, to the court. 3) Such application shall be made within two months from the day on which the guardian or tutor has been vested with his functions. 4) The application shall be allowed or dismissed based solely on the interest of the child. Article 227. - Where there isno Relative Enabled in telms oflaw. I) Where by applying the preceding Articles, a child remains without aguardian or tutor, the functions may be entrusted to such person as may be appointed bythe court. www.abyssinialaw.com 68 Revised Family Code 2) In deciding such case the court may take cognizance of the matter or on the application of any interested party whether he is a relative of the child or not. 3) A government organ who has the authority to follow up the security of children may also lay the matter before the court. Article 228. - Appointmew by the Court (1) Relative of the Minor. by Consanguinity or Affinity. The court shall appoint, as far as possible, as guardian or tutor a near relative of the minor, by consanguinity or affinity, fit to perform such functions and willing to perform them. Article 229. - (2) InstitLltion of Assistance. The functions of guardian or of tutor may, where necessary, be entmsted by the court to an institution ofassistance established for such purpose. Article 230. - Assimilated Cases. Where a person is not in aposition to exercise the functions of guardian and tutor by operation of the law or for any other reason, he shall be deemed to be not existing for the purpose of the preceding Articles. Article 231. - Identity of Guardian or of Tutor. I) As a mle, the person to whom the care ofthe person ofthe minor has been entmsted shall at the same time be his tutor. 2) The appointment of a guardian or of a tutor of the child, made by the surviving father or mother or by the court shall apply to both functions, unless the contrary results from the circumstances of the case. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 69 Article 232. - Right given to Father and Mother. The father or the mother may, where they think fit, appoint a tutor to the child, reserving to themselves the functions of guardian. Article 233. - Right given to the Court. The court may for good cause appoint as tutor a person other than the guardian, where it has the right to make such appointment. Article 234. - Tutor' 'ad hoc" (l) Conflict of Interest between Tutor and Minor. I) Where there is.conflict of interest between the tutor and the minor, atutor' 'ad hoc" shall be appointed tothe latter by the court. 2) The appointment of atutor' 'ad hoc" shall be made onthe application of the tutor or one of the ascendants, or brothers or sisters of the minor who has attained majoritv. Article 235. - (2) Cont7ict of Interests of Several Minors. I) The provisions of Article 234 shall apply where there isa conflict between the interests of several minors of whom the tutor is the common representative. 2) The conflicting interests shall in such cases be settled between the tutor and the tutor' 'ad hoc" Article 236. - Commencement of Functions. I) The functions of guardian and of tutor shall commence from the appointment of the guardian or the tutor by virtue of the law or by the decision of the court. www.abyssinialaw.com 70 Revised Family Code 2) No liability shall be incurred by the guarOlan or tutor so long as he is not aware of the circumstances under which such functions devolve on him. Article 237. - Compulso/y Nature or1"'unctions. The functions of guardian or tutOrof the minor are compulsory for the person who is vested with them. Article 238. - Application for Exemption. I) A person may apply tothe court tobeexempted from such functions if the performance thereof entails to him particular difficulties or inconveniences. 2) The guardian and the tutor may on the same conditions apply to be relieved of the functions assumed by them. Article 239. - Legal Exemptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code regarding the appointment of guardian or tutor, the following persons shall not be bound to take up the functions ofguardian ortutor, upon a mere declaration on their part, except as regards their own children: (a) any person who has completed his sixty-fifth year; (b) soldiers in active service. Article 240. - ObligntJOn to Exercise such Functions P/:ovisJOnally. I) The guardian or tutor who puts forward an objection or a case of exemption shall exercise his functions until anew guardian or tutor has been appointed. 2) The same shall apply to the guardian or tutor whose appointment is impugned. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 71 Article 24/. - Termination ofFunctions. I) The functions of guardian and of tutor shallcease where the child dies. attains majority, or is emancipated. 2) They shall cease where the guardian or (he tutor dies, or becomes incapable, or unworthy, or is removed. 3) They shall cease where a new guardian or tutor is appointed to the minor. Article 242. - Inc<lp<lcities(/) Minor. A minor isincapable of exercising the functions of guardian or of tutor except as regards his own children. Article 243. - (2) Judici<llly mteralcted Persons I) A person is incapable of being a guardian or tutor of a minor if he is under ajudicial interdiction. 2) Where a person, during the exercise of such functions, is judicially interdicted, his tutor shall without delay inform the person who, by virtue of the law, is to replace the interdicted person in those functions. 3) In default of such person, he shall apply to the court for another person to be appointed in place of the interdicted person. Article 244. - Unworthiness. I) A person may be declared by the court unworthy of exercising the functions of guardian or tutor, where, he is sentenced for a criminal offence to a punishment restric- tive of personal liberty)or to capital punishment. 2) The court may, in passing such sentence, declare the www.abyssinialaw.com 72 Revised Family Code unworthiness oftheconvicted person totheextent which itthinks fit, having regard tothe circumstances. Article 245. - Removal. (I) Guardian. I) The guardian of a minor may be removed by the court where the minor does not receive the care which his condition requires, a morally sound education or an instruction which accords with his disposition. 2) For this purpose, regard shall be had to the environment in which the guardian lives and all the circumstances of the case. 3) The guardian may in particular be removed by the court where the minor hilScommitted a criminal offence and it appears that his behaviour is due to bad education or to lack of education on the part of his guardian. Article 246. - (2) Tutor. The tutor may be removed by the court, where it appears that he administers badly the property of the minor, or where he does not comply with the directions validly given tohim bythe person or authority who entrusted him with such functions, or where his insolvency has been judicially established. Article 247. - (3) Removal of.A.;:,I.:C;;';allLS. I) The court shall declare only with extreme caution the removal of the mother or of the father or of the other ascendants as guardians or tutors of their children. 2) The court may revise its decision any time on the application of the person who has been removed from the position of guardianship or tutorship. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 73 ArtIcle 248. - (4) Procedure. I) An application for the removal of the guardian or of the tutor may be made by any interested person, or by the public prosecutor. 2) Before declaring the removal of the guardian or the tutor, the court shall enable the latter to give his reasons. 3) Where the court proceeds under Sub-Art. (2) of this Article, it shall give appropriate provisional order when ever it thinks that additional danger may entail to the person or property of the minor. Article 249. - Duties of the Court. I) Where the court is to appoint or to remove a person as guardian or tutor of a minor, it shall, before making its decision, consult, in sofar as possible, the ascendants and the brothers and sisters of the child who have attained majority. 2) Where it thinks fit. it may hear the minor himself. 3) The court shall decide having regard solely to the interest of the minor and without being bound by the information which it has obtained. Article 250. - Tutor may not be Remunerated. I) The functions of ,guardian or tutor constitute a gratuitous office 2) A specified amount of compensation may be granted to the guardian or to the tutor where the administration of the property of the minor takes a considerable part of his time. 3) Such compensation may only be taKenfrom the income of the minor and may not exceed one third of such income. www.abyssinialaw.com 74 Revised Family Code Article 251. - PeniOnal Nature of the Functions. I) The functions of guardian or tutor constitute a personal office which does not pass to the heirs of the guardian or tutor. 2) The heirs shall he liable only for the mismanagement carried out by the person whom they succeed, within the limits specified in the law of successions. Article 252. - Duties of Hein;. I) The heirs of the guardian or tutor shall, without delay, inform of his death to the person who is, by virtue of Article 225, to replace him in such functions. 2) Indefault of such person they shall apply to the court to appoint a new guardian or tutor. 3) Until they have fulfilled their obligations under Sub- Articles (I)and (2) ofthis Article, they shall remain liable to the minor and third parties. Article 253. - Proof of Capi./cityof Guardian or Tutor. The guardian or tutor may apply to the court to be given a document enabling him toprove his capacity where necessary. Article 254. - Analogy with the Tutor. The provisions of this Code relating to Tutors shall also apply to Tutors "ad hoc". Section 3. Powen; of the Guardian and of the Tutor Sub-Section I. - Care of the Person of the Minor. Article 255. - Guanliall IIwy seek Assistance limn Governmenwl Institutiolls. The guardian of the minor may seek assistance from pertinent www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 75 governmental institutions in order to carry out tne powers vested inhim under the following Articles. Article 256. - Residence of theMinor. I) The guardian shall fix the place where the minor is to reside. 2) The minor may not abandon such place without the authorization of the guardian. 3) If the minor goes away from his residence without authorization, the guardian may compel him to return thereto. Article 257. - Health of the Minor. I) The guardian shall watch over the health of the minor. 2) In case of sickness of the minor, the guardian shall take the necessary measures for his recovery. Article 258. - Cfpbringing of the Minor. I) The guardian shall direct the up bringing of the minor. 2) The guardian may take the necessary disciplinary measures for the purpose of ensuring his up bringing. Article 259. - Social ConfLIcts. I) The guardian shall direct and supervise the social contacts of the minor. 2) The guardian may not, except for good cause, prohibit the minor from seeing his ascendants or from corresponding with them. Article 260. - General and Professional Education. The guardian shall ensure that the minor be given general www.abyssinialaw.com 76 Revised Family Code education or professional training commensurate with his age and abilities. Article 261. -Income of Minor. (I) Principle. I) The guardian shaII receive the income of the minor and use it in the interest of the latter. 2) He shalIllOt be bound to render an account of such use. Article 262. - (2) Considernble Income. I) Where the income of the minor is considerable and the guardian is neither the father nor the mother of the minor, the provisions of Article 261 (2) may be set aside by the court. 2) In such case, the court shall fix the amount of money and the time of its payment to the guardian for the main- tenance and education of the minor. 3) The balance of the income ofthe minor shall remain inthe hands of the tutor to be invested by the latter. Article 263. - (3) Income deJived tinm Work of the Minor. I) Where the minor is above fourteen years of age, he shall receive the income deriving from his work. 2) He shall freely dispose of such income inaccordance with this law, after making contribution to his own main- tenance. Article 264. - (4). Property Donated orBequeathed. I) The person who donates or bequeathes property to a ,minor may order that the income from such property shall not, during the minority of the child, be received and used by the guardian. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 77 2) The provisions laid down in the contract of donation or in the Will concerning the administration and use of such income shall be complied with. Article 265. - Income not Due. The income of the minor which is not yet due shall not be the subject of an obligation undertaken by the guardian. Article 266. - Authority ofPurents. I) Where the father and mother of the child are both vested with the functions of guardianship, they shall carry out such functions in consultation and cooperation with each other. 2) In case of disagreement between the father and the mother and where such disagreement is not solved privately by themselves or tbrough arbitration, the court shall decide in the best interest of the child on the application of either of them. 3) Without prejudice to the provisions of Sub-Art. (2) of this Article, no appeal shall lie against the decision of the father and the mother in their capacity as guardians of the mll1or. Article 267. - Sepurution of Purents. Where the function of guardian isexercised by a single parent only due to separation of parents, the other parent who is not exercising the functions of guardian, the minor's ascendants, or one of his brothers or sisters who has attained majority may apply to the court against the decision taken by the guardian. www.abyssinialaw.com 78 Revised Family Code Article 268. - Where the Guardian is not the Parent. Where the functions of guardian are exercised by a person other than the father or the mother, one of the parents, any interested person or the public prosecutor may apply to the court against the decision taken by the guardian regarding the up bringing of the child. Sub-Secrion 2. - Admimswltion of the Property of the MinOl. Alticle 269. - Principle. I) The minor shall be represented by his tutor concerning his property and his pecuniary interests. 2) The tutor shall take utmost care concerning the pecuniary interests of the minor and the administration of his property. Article 270. - InventOlY ,md Valuation of Property (1) After the Tutor Assumes his Functions. I) Within two months from assuming his functions, the tutOl shnll proceed to draw up an inventory of and value. the property of the minor in thepresence of three witnesses. 2) Where the minor owes him anything he shall state itin the inventory under pain of losing his right thereto. Article 27 I. - (2) Succession Devolving on the Minor. I) Where a succession devolves on the minor, the tutor, before accepting such succession on behalf of the minor, shall cause an inventory thereof to be prepared in the presence of three witnesses, which shall specify the value of the succession. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 79 2) Where anything is due to him from such succession. he shall stateit in the inventory, under pain of losing his right thereto. 3) The tutor shall be liable to the minor for any damage arising from the absence of an inventory. Article 272. - Property of Tutor Merged with that of the Minor. I) The tutor shall take the necessary caution so that the propel1y of the minor is not mixed with that of his own property. 2) In particular, he may not deposit or causeto bedeposited, in his personal bank account, monies belonging to the m\11or. Article 273. - Securities LindArticles of Value tobeDeposited in LI Si./fe PILIce. Securities, articles of value, important documents and other similar things shall be deposited by the tutor in asafeplace if no inconvenience for the administration ofthe property ofthe minor results therefrom. Article 274. - Power of the Court. I) Where the tutor is not the father or mother of the child, one of the ascendants, or one of the minor's brothers or sisters who hasattained majority may apply to thecourt to give instruction to the tutor concerning the management of the property of the minor. 2) The court shall, after considering the nature of the property of the minor. the ability of the tutor, and the interests of the minor, give instructions it thinks ap- www.abyssinialaw.com 80 Revised Family Code propriate concerning the management of the property. Article 275. - Property Trnnsferred to the Minor by Donntion or Succession. I) A person, who donates property to aminor or from whose succession a minor inherits property, may order that the tutor shall follow certain appropriate rules inthe adminis- tration of such property. 2) Where it subsequently appears that the observance of such rules is impossible or prejudicial to the interests of the minor, the tutor may apply to the court to vary them. Article 276. Commercinl or other Enterprises I) Where commercial, industrial or other enterprises form part of the estate of the minor, the court shall, on the pplication of one of the ascendants or brothers or sisters of the child who has attained majority, instruct a tutor, who is not the father or mother of the child, whether he should liquidate such enterprises or keep them going. 2) When giving such order, the court shall have regard tothe time for which the tutorship is to last and the abilities of the tutor as well as the interests of the minor. Article 277. - Alienntian of Certain Property. I) The tutor may alienate corporeal chattels, shares and securities belonging to the minor. 2) The court may, on the application of any interested person, give to a tutor, who is not the father or mother of the child, instructions concerning such sale, or prohibit www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code HI him from.effecting it. Article 278. - Securities to bearer. I) A tutor, who is not the father or the mother of the minor, shall alienate securities to bearer, or convert them in registered securities inthe name ofthe minor within three months after they devolve on the minor. 2) The court may exempt the tutor from the duties specified (I)upon request. under Suh-Art. Article 279. - Debts and Claims. I) The tutor shall pay the debts which are due by the minor from the property of the minor. 2) He shall receive the capital and income devolving on the minor and give receipt there(or to the person effecting payment. Article 280. - Investment of Capitals (I) Duty of the Tutor. I) The tutor shall invest monies belonging to the minor where such monies exceed five hundred Ethiopian Birr. 2) The court may vary the amount specified in Sub-Art. (l) of this Article. Article 281. - (2) Time. I) Monies shall be invested within three months from the time they are at the disposal of the tutor. 2) The court may vary such period. Article 282. - Liability. I) The tutor shall he liableto pay tothe minor legalinterest www.abyssinialaw.com 82 Revised Family Code on the monies which he has failed to invest. 2) He may also be condemned to pay damages, where appropriate. Article 283. - Income. I) The tutor shall deliver to the guardian of the minor the income of the latter, and where the income isnot enough, part of the property, to be used for his maintenance and his education. 2) Unless the court decides otherwise such delivery shall be made monthly. 3) The conditions of payment may vary by agreement between the guardian and the tutor, or by the decision of the court. Article 284. - Lenses.. Unless they have been entered into with the authorization of the court, leases made by the tutor shall not be binding on the minor three years after he attains majority. Article 285. - Successions. I) The tutor shall accept on behalf of the minor the successions devolving on the latter. 2) The tutor may not renounce asuccession devolving on the minor, unless such succession is notoriously insolvent. Article 286. - Donntion. I) The tutor may not refuse a donation offered to the minor unless such donation is not important. 2) The tutor may not make any donation on behalf of the www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 83 minor other than small presents which may be required by custom. AI1icle 287. - Prohibition of UndeI1aking Suretyship. The tutor shall not pledge or mortgage the property of the minor for the debt of another person. Article 288. - Compromise. A tutor may not enter into a compromise agreement concer- ning the interests of the minor except where the interest in dispute is less than one thousand Ethiopian Birr or with the authorization of the court. Article 289. - Contracts between Tutor and Minor. I) A tutor may not buy or take on lease the property of the minor,nor may he conclude any other contract with the minor except with the authorization of the court. 2) He may not accept the assignment of any right or claim against the minor except with the authorization of the court. Article 290. - Loans. A tutor may not contract any loan on behalf of the minm except with the authorization ofthe court. Article 29I. - Consultlltion with theMinor. \) The tutor shall consult the minor in all important acts concerning him, unless the latter is less than fourteen years old. 2) The consent of the minor shallnotrelieve thetutorofhis liability. www.abyssinialaw.com 84 Revised Family Code Article 292. - Authorizntion to Act given to the Minor (I) Principle. I) The tutor may authorize the minor to conclude only those contracts which. considering his age and his financial position, are to be regardd as acts of everyday life. 2) Such authorization may be tacit. Article 293. - (2) Acts of Evelydny Life. I) An act may in no case be regarded as an act of everyday life where for its conclusion the law requires the authorization of the court. 2) Nor may an act be regarded as an act of everyday life where itentaiIson the minor anexpense orobligations the value of which exceeds three hundred Ethiopian Birr. Article 294. - (3) Effect with regard to the Tutor. The tutor shall stand surety, in favor of third parties, for the obligations, which the minor has assumed with his authorization. Article 295. - Will. I) The tutor may not make a Will on behalf of the minor. 2) A minor may not make aWill before he attains the age of sixteen years. 3) The Will made before he has attained such age shall be of no effect, notwithstanding that the minor has not revoked it after having attained the age of sixteen years. Article 296. - Expenses of Management. The tutor has the right to the refund of expenses which he personally incurs in connection with the management of the www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 85 interests of the minor. Article 297. - Rendering Report of Management of the Prope11y of the Minor. I) The tutor shall prepare a report concerning the conditions of management and accounts of the property ofthe minor. 2) The tutor shall make available such reports when reques- ted by the ascendants of the minor, or his brothers and sisters who have attained majority acting either in- dividually or jointly. Article 298. - Applicability. The provisions of Articles 264-266 of this Code shall apply to tutorship. Section 4. Sanction of the Rules for theprotection of the Minor. Sub-Section I. Acts of the Minor Article 299. - Principle. The juridical acts performed by the minor in excess of his powers shall be of no effect. Article 300. - Application for Nullity. The nullity of Nridical acts performed by the minor may be applied for only by the minor, his heirs, or his representatives. Article 30 I. - Good Faith of the Person Contracting with the Minor. I) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 299, contracts entered into by the minor shall be valid where the www.abyssinialaw.com 86 Revised Family Code contracting party could in good faith believe that the minor had the authorization to conclude them. 2) The provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article shall not apply where the other contracting party has taken advantage of the inexperience of the minor. Article 302. - Repayment. I) Payments made to the minor shall be returned to the extent of the enrichment which remains tohis benefit on the day when the action of nullity isinstituted. 2) In other cases, the minor is not bound to make repayments. Article 303. - Extra-Contl"ctual Liability and Unlawful Enrich- ment (I) Principle. Where the minor had caused damage to another person by his unlawful acts or enriched himself unlawfully ,he shall be liable in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Code relating to Extra-Contractual Liability and Unlawful Enrichment. Article 304. - (2) Mere Statement of Majority. I) The mere statement made by a minor that he is a major shall not deprive him of the right of availing himself of his minority. 2) Such statement shall not amount to a fault entailing his extra-contractual liability . Sub-Section 2.- Acts ofthe Tutor. Article 305. - Acts Regularly Performed. I) Actsperformed bythetutor,onbehalfoftheminor,shall www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 87 bebindingontheminorasthoughhehadperformedthem himself being a major, 2) They shall not bebinding onthetutorpersonally, savean explicit undertaking on his part or in cases provided by law. A/ticle 306. - Vio/ution ofLega/ Provisions, Acts pelt'ormed by the tutor in violation of legal provisions shallbe subjecttotheprovisions o,fthe Titleofthe CivilCode relating to Agency in the case in which a representative has exceeded his powers, Article 307. - Third P,lrties. I) The fact that the tutor has acted contrary to,the instruc- tions of the court may not be set up against third parties unless they have or should have known such instructions. 2) The provisions of Sub-Art, (I) of this Article shall also apply to those instructions given to the tutor by a person who has donated, bequeathed or left property to the mInor. A/ticle 308. - Tutor' 'udhoc", Theprovisions ofthisSub-Section shallalsoapplytothetutor ad hoc. Suh-Section 3. Liuhi/ities Which May be Incumd Article 309. - Tutor. I) The tutor shall be liable for the damage which may be caused to the minor due to his mismanagement of property, or the fact that he has not obeyed the instruc- www.abyssinialaw.com 88 Revised Family Code tions given to him or the fact that he has acted in a case where his interests were in conflict with those of the mmor. 2) The provisions of Sub-Art. (I) of this Article shall apply to the tutor ad hoc. Section 5. Cessation of the Disability of the Minor Article 3IO.- Ccwses. The disability of the minor shall cease where: (a) he attains majority; or (b) he is emancipated. Sub-Section I. Emancipation Article 3II. - Man1age. Where a minor is married in accordance with Article 7 (2) of this Code, he shall be emancipated by the sole fact of such marnage. Article 312. - Explicit Enwncipation. I) Where a minor has attained the age of fourteen years,his guardian or his tutor or any interested person may apply to the court for his emancipation. 2) The court may decide to emancipate the minor after considering his conditions, the reasons applied for, and where it finds that the emancipation is in the best interest of the minor. Article 313. - Effects. An emancipated minor shall be deemed under the law to have attained majority. www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 89 Article 314.-- Irrevocability. I) Emancipation may not be revoked. 2) Emancipation resulting from marriage shall retain its effects notwithstanding that the marriage is dissolved. 3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (2) of this Article, the court may give adecision itthinks appropriate concerning the emancipation of the minor where it pronounces the dissolution of the marriage on the ground that the age prescribed by the law for marriage is not observed. Sub-Section 2. -Rendering of Accounts of Tuton,hip Article 315. - PJinciple' I) Where his functions terminate, the tutor shall render an account of his administration to his ex-ward ortothe heirs of the latter. 2) He shall hand over the property which belongs to him and prepare a statement showing the rights which pertain to him and the debts to which he is bound. Article 316. - Where there is no Inventory. I) Where the tutor has failed to draw up an inventory when he assumed his functions, or when a succession has devolved on the minor, the minor may prove, by any means of which property his estate or such succession or donation consists. 2) Unless the contrary is proved, a certain property shall be deemed to have pertained to the minor where witnesses make an attestation to this effect. www.abyssinialaw.com 90 Revised Family Code A/1icle 3J7.- ApprovuJ of Accounts. I) The approval of the accounts of the tutorship given by the ward may be revoked by him within one year after it has taken place, so long as the ward has not attained the age of eighteen years. 2) The same shall apply to the exemption from rendering accounts granted by the ward to the tutor. 3) The provisions of Sub-rts. (1) and (2) may not be invoked by the heirs of the minor who have attained majority when they themselves have approved the ac- counts of the tutor or exempted the tutor from rendering accounts. Article 3J8. - Limit<ltiol1. I) Any action of the minor, his representatives or his heirs against the tutor, based on the liability of the latter and relating to acts of the tutorship shall be barred if it is not instituted within five years following the cessation of the functions of the tutor. 2) The minor shall retain the right to claim the restitution of his property even after the expiry of the time specified in Sub-Art. (I) of this Article. CHAPTER THIRTEEN Miscellaneous Provisions Article 3J9. - InappJicubJe Laws. I) The following provisions shall not be applicable in the Administrations where thisCode applies: www.abyssinialaw.com Revised Family Code 91 (a) provisions of the Civil Code of 1960 on Persons (Book One, Articles 198-338); (b) provisions of the Civil code of 1960 on Family and Successions (Book Two, Articles 550-825). 2) Any laws, regulations, directives, decisions or practice inconsistent with this Code shall not be applicable on matters provided in this Code. Article 320. - Rights Acquired Under Repealed Laws. I) Unless otherwi seexpressly provided tothe contrary, legal situations created prior to the coming into force of this Code shall remain valid notwithstanding that this Code modifies the conditions under which such situations may be created. 2) Unless otherwise expressly provided to the contrary, this Code shall not change effects arising out of legal situations created under the repealed law prior to the coming into force of this Code. Article 32/. - Registr<ltion. I) The Federal Government shall, within six months from the coming into force of this Code, issue registration law applicable totheAdministrations wherethisCodeistobe enforced and establish the necessary institutions. 2) Until the Office of Civil Status is established in accor- dance with Sub-Art. (I) of this Article, certificates of birth, marriage, and other relevant certificates issued orto be issued by an appropriate authority of the Adminis- tration where this Code is applicable shall be deemed to www.abyssinialaw.com 92 Revised Family Code have been issued by the Office of Civil status and considered valid. Article 322. - Pending Family Cses. I) Family cases pending before court prior to the coming into force of this Code shall be settled inaccordance with this Code. 2) All divorce cases pending before family arbitrators before the coming into force of this Code inaccordance with the repealed law regular courts having jurisdiction. 3) The courts shall decide these cases in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Article 323. - Power to Issue Regulations. I) The Council of Ministers may issue Regulations for the implementation of this Code. 2) The Administrations where this Code shall be applicable may issue directives and Rules of procedure' necessary for the implementation of this Code.